some ideas on representing a reactor in the game

Basic reactor physics

Reactor power varies in an exponential manner with time driven by the
reactivity (related to any excess neutrons over the number that barely
maintains a chain reaction at steady power).  A small proportion of the
neutrons are "delayed neutrons" which might be a minute behind the fission
events that caused them.

Power drives the temperature of the fuel (short term) and other components
(longer term) but temperature is also affected by the coolant removing heat
from the fuel and taking it to the boilers.

Temperature affects the reactivity through doppler shifting of atoms in the
neutron spectrum and by thermal expansion of reactor components and by voiding
in the coolant.  How these work out in total depends on quite a bit of detail.
Safety is promoted when at least some of the feedbacks are negative - that is
when an increase in power leads to conditions that naturally lead to a reduction
in power.  The opposite would be positive feedback which should be minimised.

The fact that reactivity drives power, power drives temperature and temperature
drives reactivity leads in real life to repetitive finite element calculations
finding values that satisfy the equations in time and space.  For game purposes
a single-point reactor with values for reactivity, power, fuel temperature and
some coolant properties should be enough (and this avoids looking at the stability
of the power generation across the core).

Control rods are made of neutron-absorbing material and inserting them further into
the core reduces the reactivity - and negative reactivity means reduction of power.
Shutdown rods are held outside the core in normal operation so they can be inserted
to add large negative reactivity. Measurements of temperature and neutron flux - if
if they exceed allowed values - will lead to an automatic shutdown in a few seconds.

The measured values of temperature and coolant flow and the calculated power will
be shown to operators.  Refuelling is infrequent and probably does not need to
feature in the game.


Accidents

Melting fuel comes from either generating too much heat in it (excessive power)
or applying too little cooling - or both. Excess power can come from wrong
control rod movements, loading the wrong fuel, having a wrong idea of the reactor
conditions etc. Inadequate cooling can come from leaks, blockages, pump failures
and loss of power to drive pumps. Studying causes and effect can be done using
tree diagrams:
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fault_tree_analysis
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event_tree_analysis

Chernobyl involved greatly increased power. Three Mile Island involved
reduced cooling because of a slow undetected leak of steam through a valve
that was open while supposed to be closed.  Automatic shutdown systems
didn't prevent Three Mile Island because a reactor after shutdown continues to
produce heat at around 6% of full power (depending on details of composition and
history) and cooling at that level has to be maintained if fuel temperature is
not to rise.
